# Guaranteed Stability

I often think about the the term _"Golden Handcuffs"_ and how it relates to different jobs I've had, but I'm still not quite sure what kind of connotation it has. It usually relates to some current or future incentive of your employment which makes it much less beneficial to leave than it would be to stay in that position. More often than not it has an association with monetary incentives, including: RSUs, deferred bonuses, looming IPO, etc. Companies, like Amazon or Meta, dangle the carrot of cold hard cash options in front of their engineers. Burn yourself out, you won't get your vested award, see it through and ironically you've likely produced more value for the company than the award you were granted with. Kind of like an insurance buffer, at least for the employer. It's similar to how H1Bs get exploited....but I'm not going to comment on that. Regardless, there are jobs that are _just to good_ to give up even if you've got no interest in being there any longer.

### It can't all be about money, right?
Well, no it doesn't have to be and it isn't. Right now I work for the government as a systems software engineer. The __number one__ thing that gets brought up when mentioning benefits is stability. If "What's the best benefit of being a federal employee" came up in Family Feud, they'd probably have a hard time populating all answer options since 97/100 would have answered stability. You won't get fired....ever (well, assuming you aren't a baboon in the workplace). Economy goes into a recession? You might not get paid this week, but you still have a job (yes, you'll still need to work btw)! Mass layoffs of engineers? Not here! Restructuring? We welcome it with open arms!

It's honestly a solid benefit; the stressor of losing your job in a turbulent economy cannot be overlooked, so eliminating it entirely is big bonus points. However, there's an interesting, maybe obvious, caveat on the working environemnt it creates. Other than the stated obvious, if its not stability then it is health benefits. Now at some point I would like to actually sit down and see how that benefit stacks up against private sector plans, but the basic guideline is that the government subsidizes up to 75% of your premium, which is nice at face value. Maybe I'll go down that rabbit hole in another post. Regardless, both of these benefits are strong indicators for "Golden Handcuffs" along with their aforementioned monetary counterparts, however, stability is really the odd ball out of all the options mentioned.

### Implications of guaranteed job stability
>This is a weird one to tackle because you will inevitably sound like an ass while making your point, which is what I'll probably end up doing.

Back in undergrad I minored in Physics, with one of my (technically two) courses covering General Relativity. It was there that I learned about the traditional Gallilaen Reference Frames for event observation. It's one of those (many) things in Physics that have applications beyond the immediate problem those theorems and proofs solved. In short, two people can reach different conclusions about the same event because their frame of references differ. The observed velocity of a flying plane would look a lot slower if I was driving towards it than it would had I been standing on the side of the road. All of this to say, my (small sample) observation of engineering teams within the government is heavily based off of my own experiences in different working environments and likely some attribution to my own career goals, i.e. my own reference frame.

If we could "group" together the engineers whom I work alongside with, what would those groups look like? Group A would encompass those who are doing it for the "love of the game". Could include the mission their supporting, the pure engineering their doing, the flexibility to go down their own rabbit holes, and/or see growth potential of climbing the ranks. These are typically the "good" engineers, ignoring reliability, they are the ones who are sufficiently adept at figuring out any problem. We like those engineers. Group B engineers are what I would call the "misfits" or "ghosts". Those who are actively planning their early/mid career exit from civil service. These engineers are similar to Group A in technical competency, but have not subscribed to the "sweet deal" and the commitment that comes with it, and are typically "checked-out", frustrated, or digruntled with their current situation. I characterize myself as a Group B engineer. Then there's Group C... To put it bluntly, Group C are the dead-weight engineers, and there's a lot of them unfortunately.

### Group C Engineers
Now I'm not faulting Group C. A lot of these engineers transistioned right from undergrad to civil service, and just don't know anything other than the federal environment. Regardless, much of this group is dead-weight. Now I would give grace, since you can't really be mad at a young engineer out of college who has to learn how to not have his/her hand held any longer, but the sheer size of Group C in comparision to Group A and Group B makes that difficult. These are the engineers who've subscribed to the "sweet deal", but because either it was their only option or they seek nothing more than having their basic needs met. So in reality you could argue Group C is comprised of two subgroups. Group C.a, are  the helpless engineers who flounder under pressure or lack of direction. Ones that probably wouldn't make it very long in the private sector because they require too much hand-holding and don't have that instinctual activation that they're asking too many questions and they should _at least_ try to arrive at a solution or a diagnosis of the problem. Group C.b are the engineers who've acknowledged the (palpable) performance threshold, have their basic needs met, and have no desire to push boundaries, question architecture, highlight existing problems, etc. They do _explicitly_ what they're told, and nothing more. Now the number of these engineers is frustrating in itself to acknowledge, but it's just how obvious and widely accepted this is that make it even more frustrating. What makes it worse, is that a lot of these individuals make it into management effectively shedding their once developing engineering skillset. So why does there seem to exist an incubation chamber for "comfort-engineering"? Because of the number one federal job benefit...stability. 

>Funny story: There is an engineer who on the hour, of every hour, will take the longest path to the furthest bathroom in the building. I pee a lot (big fan of water) so I know for a fact he's typically there at least 20min in stall for each visit. The funniest part is that after washing his hands, much like a doctor would before performing surgery, he takes the paper towels used to dry his hands then walk to the furthest trashcan in the building to throw them away. Ayo! New traversal algo just dropped! Calling it "MIP"? (Most Inconvenient Path)

### Group B Engineers
I believe that Group B acknowledges that they are product of their environment, and realize that there are diminishing returns the longer you stay if you haven't "subscribed" to the deal. The longer you stay, the longer you become a product of the federal environment. That will not be ignored by a Hiring Manager in the private sector. So as time goes on, Group B has a choice. Fight the current and explicitly prioritize developing your own skillset with the "freedom" you're given in the shortest time possible and exit. Or, accept the deal and choose if you want to be a Group A or Group C engineer. For myself, I'm trying to fight the current and that isn't easy since an unintended side-effect is an inability to "fit-in". 

So, what gives? Who gave Group B the right to judge? Why don't they go fix all the problems? Well for one they're largely outnumbered, however one reason I could argue is the similarity of Group B engineers having private sector experience. Intel was not only my first job but the team I was on was the first group to power on next-gen Intel CPUs. That environment burned a fire under my ass and as a result I not only worked hard but it really did make me a better engineer. The systems in place to maximize your success and reduce roadblock have stuck with me to this day. So what gives us the right? Not outright skill, but it's the experience of working within a well-oiled machine and living in a stark contrast to it. Since I worked in high-volume manufacturing, if yield was tanking you better not only root-cause it but provide a solution or workaround for it. Otherwise, the floor will shutdown for you to do that (not good). Private sector is very unapologetic, and that gives you a unique lens to how federal engineering functions. I made it through I think 2 or 3 layoff cycles in 2 years I worked at Intel before leaving to move back to NC, so after seeing someone get let go after returning from maternity leave I then realized it was a cold cold world!

### Comfort Engineering
To be frank, I'm not entirely sure how this environment manifested itself but I know the promise of stability is a key contributor. The performance expectation has a very low bar due to that promise. An engineer who can't individually function or complete their tasks will be pushed towards "house-cleaning" tasks, different teams, or just pure documentation. But they won't leave, affectively lowering the average competency. When I was asked why I was so disgruntled about my previous job, I would always talk about a competency gradient and how it compared against Intel.


