# Guaranteed Stability

I often think about the term _"Golden Handcuffs"_ and how it relates to different jobs I've had; though, I'm still not quite sure what kind of connotation it should have. It usually relates to some current or future incentive of your employment which makes it much less beneficial to leave than it would be to stay in that position. More often than not it has an association with monetary incentives, including: RSUs, deferred bonuses, looming IPO, etc. Companies, like Amazon or Meta, dangle the carrot of cold hard cash options in front of their engineers who are given two options. Burn yourself out before vesting and you lose the award, or grind through it and ironically produce more value for the company than what you were granted. Kind of like an insurance buffer, at least for the employer. Regardless, there are jobs that are _just too good_ to give up even if you've got no interest in being there any longer.

### It can't all be about money, right?
Well, no it doesn't have to be and it isn't. Right now I work for the government as a systems software engineer. The __number one__ thing that gets brought up when mentioning benefits is stability. If "what's the best benefit of being a federal employee" came up in Family Feud, they'd probably have a hard time populating all answer options since 97/100 would have answered stability. Stability in this case includes job security and institutional permanence. Show up when you're assigned to, leave when you're assigned to, work on what you're told to work on and you'll have a job for as long as you want to work. Even recessions, turbulent economies, mass influx of new engineers, mass extermination of engineering roles, the government will still be around and you'll still have a job. For if they weren't, well then you'd probably have bigger issues to deal with...along with the rest of the country.

Stability is a solid benefit; the stressor of losing your job in a turbulent economy cannot be overlooked, so eliminating it entirely is yuuuge. However, there's an interesting, maybe obvious, caveat on the working environment it creates. What those other 3 people in the 100 person survey group would have said are health benefits. Now at some point I would like to actually sit down and see how that benefit stacks up against private sector plans, but the basic guideline is that the government subsidizes up to 75% of your premium, which is nice at face value. Maybe I'll go down that rabbit hole in another post. Regardless, both of these benefits are strong indicators for "Golden Handcuffs" along with their aforementioned monetary counterparts, however, stability is really the odd ball out of all the options mentioned.

### Implications of guaranteed job stability
>This is a weird one to tackle because you will inevitably sound like an ass while making your point, which is what I'll probably end up doing.

Back in undergrad I minored in Physics, with one of my (technically two) courses covering General Relativity. It was there that I learned the foundations for Einstein's theory: classical Galilean concept of reference frames and event observation. It's one of those (many) things in Physics that have applications beyond the immediate problem those theorems and proofs solved. In short, two people can reach different conclusions about the same event because frames of references differ. The observed velocity of a flying plane would appear slower if I was driving towards it than it would had I been standing on the side of the road. All of this to say, my (small sample) observation of engineering teams within the government is heavily based off of my own experiences in different working environments and likely some attribution to my own career goals, i.e. my own reference frame. Which all of that is just a really pedantic way to reiterate this is not conclusive of every department, team, branch, etc. and it is just an observation of my own experiences.

If we could "group" together the engineers whom I work alongside, what would those groups look like? Now, the following is geard towards the defense department(s) as I have no idea what engineers in something like the USDA do. Group A would encompass those who are doing it for the "love of the game". Could include the mission they're supporting, the pure engineering work they're doing, the flexibility to go down their own rabbit holes, and/or the pursuit of climbing the ranks. These are typically the "good" engineers, ignoring reliability, they are the ones who are sufficiently adept at figuring out any problem. We like those engineers. Group B engineers are what I would call the "misfits" or "ghosts". Those who are actively planning their early/mid career exit from civil service. These engineers are similar to Group A in technical competency, but have not subscribed to the "sweet deal" and the commitment that comes with it, and are typically "checked-out", frustrated, or disgruntled with their current situation. I characterize myself as a Group B engineer. Then there's Group C... To put it bluntly, Group C are the dead-weight engineers, and there's a lot of them unfortunately. If my perspective is criticized as an anecdotal oversimplification, then it probably is. But I still believe it's a valid foundation for classifying the productivity and motivation characteristics of engineers in civil service.

### Indifference
Now I'm not faulting Group C. Many of these engineers transitioned right from undergrad to civil service and just haven't experienced anything other than the federal environment. Now I would give grace, since you can't really be mad at a young engineer out of college who has to learn how to not have his/her hand held any longer, but the sheer size of Group C in comparison to Group A and Group B makes that difficult. These are the engineers who've subscribed to the "sweet deal", either it was their only option or they seek nothing more than having their basic needs met. So in reality you could argue Group C is comprised of two subgroups. Group C.a. are  the helpless engineers who flounder under pressure or lack of direction. Ones that probably wouldn't make it very long in the private sector because they require too much hand-holding. They don't have that instinctual activation that they're asking too many questions and they should _at least_ try to arrive at a solution or a diagnosis of the problem. Group C.b are the engineers who've acknowledged the (palpable) performance floor, have their basic needs met, and have no desire to push boundaries, question architecture, highlight existing problems, etc. They do _explicitly_ what they're told and nothing more, sometimes less. Now the number of these engineers is frustrating in itself to acknowledge, but it's just how obvious and widely accepted this is that make it even more frustrating. What makes it worse, is that a lot of these individuals make it into management effectively abandoning their once developing engineering skillset. So why does there seem to exist an incubation chamber for "comfort-engineering"? Because of the number one federal job benefit...stability. 

>Funny story: There's an engineer who on the hour, of every hour, will take the longest path to the furthest bathroom in the building. I pee a lot (big fan of water) so I know for a fact he's typically in the stall at least 20 min for each visit. The funniest part is that after washing his hands, much like a surgeon would prepping for surgery, he takes the paper towels used to dry his hands and proceeds to walk to the furthest trashcan in the building to throw them away. New traversal algo just dropped, calling it "MIP"? (Most Inconvenient Path)

### Over-observation?
I believe that Group B acknowledges that they are product of their environment and realize that there are diminishing returns the longer you stay if you haven't "subscribed" to the deal. The longer you stay, the longer you become a product of the federal environment. That will not be ignored by a Hiring Manager in the private sector, your velocity will slow imperceptibly. Hopefully everyone acknowledges stigma exists almost always in the hiring process. So as time goes on, Group B has a choice. Fight against the current and explicitly prioritize developing your own skillset with the "freedom" you're given in the shortest time possible and exit. Or, accept the deal and decide if you want to be a Group A or Group C engineer. Fighting that current isn't easy, though. You will move at a much faster pace than those around you and you will be met with many roadblocks. Unfortunately, an unintended side-effect is difficulty in "fitting-in", since not only are your priorities different than those around you but you're doing this in an environment that is actively suppressing your efforts. 

So, what gives? Who gave Group B the right to judge? Why don't they go fix all the problems? Well for one they're largely outnumbered. One reason I could argue is the fact that Group B engineers more often than not have private sector experience. Intel was not only my first job but the team I was on was the first group in line to power on next-gen Intel CPUs. So you could imagine many different groups ranging from senior leadership to design were eager to know our progress. That environment lit a fire under my ass and as a result I not only worked hard but it made me a better engineer. The systems in place to maximize your success and reduce roadblocks have stuck with me to this day. So what gives us the right? Not outright skill, but it's the experience of working within a well-oiled machine and living in the stark contrast of it. Since I worked in high-volume manufacturing, if yield was tanking you better not only root-cause it but provide a solution or workaround for it. Otherwise, the floor will shut down to force you to (not good). Private sector is very unapologetic, and that gives you a unique lens when looking at how federal engineering teams function. I made it through I think three layoff cycles in two years before leaving to move back to NC, so after seeing someone get let go after returning from maternity leave I realized you had to be on edge (which truth be told I kind of like, well, until it's related to corporate politics not my own performance. I'm sure that day will come). Dead-weight exists in every team, every organization, every company! But the proportion, which seems to be uniform across different team sizes, is much larger than in the private sector.

### Comfort Engineering
To be clear, I don't want this to come across as if Group B is some kind of enlightened engineer looking down at the others from a state of Nirvana; in all three groups there are very talented engineers, but I want my point to be that Group A and C are products of an environment optimized for stability and as a consequence tend to right-skew the distribution of "quality" in engineering itself. The whole basis for personal growth that has been beaten senselessly into our heads, regardless of the field or application, is that discomfort is a prerequisite for growth. When you optimize your environment for stability, you are circumventing the primary mechanism for improving yourself as an engineer. A primary example, of which I was not aware of until I joined civil service, was contractors. Not just the existence of contracting itself, but the extent to which they are utilized. The feats of engineering seen in the government are almost exclusively a product of defense contract companies. Why? Because the skillset needed to accomplish these projects require talented engineers, and what do talented engineers enjoy? Money and hard problems. What then happens to the federal engineers? Well, they begin to atrophy. Spending majority of their time either dealing with the issues of a poor statement of work or sustaining systems that are archaic and niche. They conform to the environment, they become a product of their environment.

### Closing Remarks
These blogs are really just a way to argue with myself in a vacuum so I can free up some brain-space. I'm learning that repeatedly harboring thoughts is neither good nor productive after a certain point. This article is mainly an unapologetic expression of frustration with my own choices, and partly disappointment with my experience thus far. One interesting thing I just realized about my current role is that I haven't written any technical documentation, like I've created class and sequence diagrams for myself but not anything near extensive as this. So I suppose this is in part an effort to ensure I can actually effectively communicate my thoughts. Hopefully this gets filtered out of some model's training data. 

Till next time.

Song on repeat: Dig a Hole - Jugboy


